Update the bare metal fulfillment proposal (#31)
innabox/enhancement-proposals: enhancements/bare-metal-fulfillment/README.md

requests. Bare metal fulfillment provides a unified API for this manipulation while also giving us a single point
of integration with backend bare metal inventory and management systems.

### User Stories

* As an O-SAC developer, I want a bare metal fulfillment architecture that allows support for multiple bare metal backends
* As an O-SAC developer, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment in workflows such as cluster fulfillment
* As a provider, I want to specify bare metal workflows for both internal and tenant use
* As a provider, I want to track bare metal usage for reporting and billing purposes
* As a provider, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment in workflows such as agent provisioning
* As a tenant, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment to acquire and configure hardware

### Goals

We will implement a bare metal fulfillment architecture that has the following features:

* Enables support for multiple bare metal backends
* Allows providers to specify bare metal workflows that automate bare metal configuration (such as image provisioning)
* Usable by tenants, providers, and within other O-SAC fulfillment workflows (such as cluster fulfillment)

> * Tracks host assignment for reporting and billing purposes

Reviewer: Nit: I would make all of these verbs singular (Enable, Allow, Track)

Because that they work in the sentence, "Our goal is to ..."

Author: interesting! I chose tenses that match the sentence above the list, which has a singular subject ("architecture")

Author: Fixed by removing "has the following features", clarifying the noun/verb agreement.

### Non-Goals

* This proposal does not implement bare metal networking; instead, it assumes the existence of an O-SAC Networking API that can be utilized when configuring networking for bare metal hosts.
* This proposal does not implement serial console access to bare metal hosts.
* This proposal does not accommodate a single O-SAC environment with multiple bare metal inventories (although the architecture is designed to support this feature in the future).

## Proposal

We propose creating the following CRDs:

* **Bare Metal Pool:** A bare metal pool specifies two items:
  * **Host Sets:** A collection of desired hosts
  * **Profile:** A configuration that specifies how the bare metal pool should behave: additional restrictions on the desired hosts, and templates that should be applied for additional configuration

> * **Host:** Represents a lease on a host, and not the host itself. An ephemeral resource that can be used to manipulate the host after acquisition, and which can be safely deleted when the host is released.

Reviewer 2: > **Host:** Represents a lease on a host, and not the host itself

This is not going to be confusing at all :) Why not HostLease or just Lease?

Author: Yeah, you're definitely right; we'll call it HostLease

>   * **Host Management Class:** Specifies how a host can be managed (OpenStack, Carbide, etc). Each Host is associated with one Host Management Class.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if you're eventually looking at CAPI-style Interace-Implementation duality (e.g. Machines vs Metal3Machines), where instead of a vaguely specified class you have something like:

```yaml
spec:
  implementationRef:
    apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: OpenStackHost  # or OpenStackHostLease?
    name: my-openstack-host
    namespace: infra
```

>   * **Host Class:** e.g, `fc430`, `h100`

Reviewer: I worry that this naming will lead to confusion. In other instances where we use a "class" attribute (`StorageClass`, `IngressClass`, `NetworkClass`), the attribute identifies the controller that will reconcile this resource. That suggests the natural attribute name for the "host management class" would simply be `HostClass`.

I would follow that model here and rename the host management class to "host class", and then adopt a different term for the "type" of host. Perhaps "host type" or "host model"?

Reviewer: The metering proposal uses "Instance types".

Author: I don't hate it - but the one thing that gives me pause is that there's already an established `HostClass` resource type that was created way back when for cluster fulfillment; I was just copying that precedent. If we were to rename `HostClass` to `InstanceClass`, would you suggest doing that renaming through the OSAC repositories?

Author: Thinking about it - yep, let's call it `Host Type`

Author: Updated!

* **Host Inventory Operator:** Reconciles Hosts with no Host Management Class assigned; queries the backend inventory, assigns a host, and populates the Host CR with information about that host (including the Host Management Class).
* **Host Management Operator (Host Management Class-specific):** Reconciles Hosts corresponding to the operator's Host Management Class; a new Host Management Operator will be created for each bare metal management backend. Allows bare metal management operations to be performed upon the host (power management, provisioning, etc).

### Workflow Description

Bare metal fulfillment can be triggered by a tenant (through the fulfillment service), a provider (through their own workflow), or another O-SAC fulfillment workflow. In all cases, the initial result is the creation of a Bare Metal Pool CR.

#### Bare Metal Pool Creation

1. The Bare Metal Pool CR is created, specifying the desired Host Set and Profile
2. The Bare Metal Pool Operator:
  * Iterates through `spec.hostSets` and creates a Host CR for each requested host
    * Uses the following values when creating the Host CRs

>       * Adds the host set’s resource class to the Host CRs `spec.selector` dictionary

Reviewer: This needs to match the nomenclature selected earlier. Right now, that would be "host class", although as suggested above I think we need to rename that.

Author: changed to "host class" for now

Author: Changed to host type

>       * Adds the values in the profile’s `matchHosts` attribute to the Host CRs `spec.selector` dictionary

Reviewer: I think we should rename `matchHosts` to `matchLabels`, because that's exactly how we're using it.

Author: fixed!

  * Allows Host CR to be deleted

#### Bare Metal Pool Deletion

1. The Bare Metal Pool CR is deleted
2. The Bare Metal Pool Operator:
  * Deletes the pool’s Host CRs
  * Executes the deprovisioning step of the template specified by the profile’s `bareMetalPoolTemplate`
    * This template might contain a step that waits for the pool’s hosts to be deprovisioned
  * Allows Bare Metal Pool CR to be deleted after the above operations are complete
3. The Host Management Operator:
  * Executes the deprovisioning step of the template specified by the Host CR’s `spec.template`
    * This template will typically modify the Host CR `spec` in order to perform operations
  * Unsets the Host CR’s hostManagementClass
4. The Host Inventory Operator:
  * Updates the bare metal inventory to unassign the bare metal pool from the host
  * Allows Host CR to be deleted

### API Extensions

#### Bare Metal Pool

The Bare Metal Pool CR acts as the entrypoint into bare metal fulfillment. For example:

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: BareMetalPool
metadata:
  name: bm-pool-12345
  namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  hostSets:
    - fc430: 2

>     - h100: 1

Reviewer 2: nit: maps are anti-pattern in k8s (they're confusing for users and impossible to extend later), you're looking at something like

```yaml
  hostSets:
    - class: fc430
      replicas: 2
    ...
```

Author: Ah, yep - we'll change this

  profile:
    name: imageProvisioning

>     templateParameters: some-json-string

Reviewer 2: Just curious: is there a reason not to make this a link to a ConfigMap rather than making users deal with JSON?

Author: Oh, we expect this to be provided by the tenant user outside of OpenShift; this mirrors what we do with cluster fulfillment.

```

The `imageProvisioning` profile is a configuration set by the provider that contains information regarding what hosts
to acquire, expected input, and the templates to be run against both the bare metal pool, and the hosts that it creates:

``` yaml

> imageProvisioning:

Reviewer 2: nit: This is not a complete CRD, right? For an external person like me, it would be easier to read a complete example

Author: Ah, this is an independent configuration, likely read from a file; the intent is to allow providers to detail specific repeatable workflows available for their tenant users. This mirrors what OSAC is doing for cluster fulfillment, where providers expose cluster templates and tenants choose the one that matches their intent for the cluster. The difference here is that we want to provide a template for an individual host (for individual host provisioning) and a template for the bare metal pool as a whole (for things like private network configuration).

I'll expand this section with these details and explanations.

  matchLabels:
    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available

>   expectedParameters: [“imageURL”]

Author: Updated!

  hostTemplate: host-image-provision
```

#### Host

Host CRs are created by the Bare Metal Pool Operator when it reconciles a Bare Metal Pool CR:

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: Host
metadata:
  name: host-54321
  namespace: osac-namespace
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    hostClass: fc430
    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available
  templateID: host-image-provision
  templateParameters: some-json-string
```

When a Host CR is created, it is not associated with a host from the backend inventory. That
association only occurs after the Host Inventory Operator reconciles the Host CR:

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: Host
metadata:
  name: host-54321
  namespace: osac-namespace
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    hostClass: fc430
    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available
  templateID: host-image-provision
  templateParameters: some-json-string
  id: host-id

>   name: host-name

Reviewer 2: id/name seem to me like a part of the status, don't they come from the provisioner? And I guess the classes below too?

Author: Copying-and-pasting Michael's explanation:

"All of these should go in the Spec. That might be unintuitive. But it follows examples such as:

    PVCs that fill in the spec.VolumeName after matching the PVC to a real PV
    Services that fill in spec.ClusterIP after automatically obtaining an available IP address

In those cases and ours, the fields in question are still part of the "desired state"; we're just letting the system help us fill in some of the details.

Status should be deterministically reproducible. If someone deleted the status from a resource, you would expect that the controller would re-create an equivalent status assuming the real world state hadn't changed. For that reason, backup tools such as Velero default to ignoring Status and letting each controller re-create it."

  hostManagementClass: openstack
  networkClass: openstack
status:
  poweredOn: false
  networkInterfaces:
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f1
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f2
  provisioning:
    state: available
```

That assignment also sets the Host CR's `hostManagementClass` and `networkClass`. Once the `hostManagementClass` is set,
the Host CR can be reconciled by the Host management Operator specific to that host management class, allowing management

> operations against that host:

Reviewer 2: It does look to me that you're combining at least 3 different CRDs in Host, and it's going to be confusing to use and to debug (I'm personally quite lost at this point without your prior background).

Author: I'll work on some clarity!

We integrate with these backends in different ways. The Host Inventory Operator will accommodate multiple
bare metal inventory backends; this integration is coded directly in the operator. On the other hand, the
Host Management Operator will be specific to a particular host management class; thus, there will be separate
Host Management Operators for Ironic, Carbide, etc.

### Risks and Mitigations

We need to integrate with a variety of bare metal backends. If our design does not allow us to do so
easily, then we may find ourselves in a position where we need to restructure and recode a significant
chunk of our architecture. In order to mitigate this risk, we will clearly identify the process for integrating
with a backend; and we will isolate the integration points to both minimize the needed integration work, and
to reduce the impact of portions of this architecture need to be reworked.

### Drawbacks

TBD

## Alternatives (Not Implemented)

One question that has been raised is whether it's possible to standardize on a single bare metal management
backend, with OpenShift BareMetalHosts identified as an ideal backend. However, BareMetalHosts do not currently

> meet all of our requirements (such as networking or integration with an external inventory).

Reviewer: Really it's the integration with external inventory that's the problem here; the lack of networking support is a non-issue based on:

> * This proposal does not implement bare metal networking; instead, it assumes the existence of an O-SAC Networking API that can be utilized when configuring networking for bare metal hosts.

Author: Updated to clarify "meet all of the MOC's requirements" (as opposed to this proposal's requirements).

* This proposal does not implement serial console access to bare metal hosts.
* This proposal does not accommodate a single O-SAC environment with multiple bare metal inventories (although the architecture is designed to support this feature in the future).

## Proposal

We propose creating the following CRDs:

* **Bare Metal Pool:** A bare metal pool represents a collection of bare metal hosts which share a common desired configuration. It specifies two items:
  * **Host Sets:** A collection of desired hosts
  * **Profile:** A configuration that specifies how the bare metal pool should behave: additional restrictions on the desired hosts, and templates that should be applied for additional configuration

* **Host Lease:** Represents a lease on a host; an ephemeral resource that can be used to manipulate the host after acquisition, and which can be safely deleted when the host is released.
  * **Host Class:** Specifies how a host can be managed (OpenStack, Carbide, etc). Each Host is associated with one Host Class.

>   * **Host Type:** e.g, `fc430`, `h100`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * **Host Type:** Describes the type of hardware represented by this host. Analogous to "instance type" in AWS or "resource class" in Ironic. E.g. `fc430`, `h100`
```

These CRDs will be managed by the following operators:

* **Bare Metal Pool Operator:**

  * Creates/deletes Host Lease CRs corresponding to the hosts desired for the bare metal pool
  * Executes setup/teardown templates applicable to the entire bare metal pool (and not to individual hosts)

> * **Host Inventory Operator:** Reconciles Host Leases with no Host Class assigned by querying the backend inventory, assigning a host, and populating the Host Lease CR with information about that host (including the Host Class).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Host Inventory Operator:** Reconciles Host Leases with no Host Class assigned. Queries the backend inventory, assigns a host, and populates the Host Lease CR with information about that host (including the Host Class).
```

* **Host Management Operator (Host Class-specific):** Reconciles Host Leases corresponding to the operator's Host Class; a new Host Management Operator will be created for each bare metal management backend. Allows bare metal management operations to be performed upon the host associated with the Host Lease (power management, provisioning, etc).

### Workflow Description

> Bare metal fulfillment can be triggered by a tenant (through the fulfillment service), a provider (through their own workflow), or another O-SAC fulfillment workflow. In all cases, the initial result is the creation of a Bare Metal Pool CR.

Reviewer: Bare metal fulfillment is triggered by creating a Bare Metal Pool CR. This may be created by a tenant interacting with the fulfillment service or by a provider implementing their own custom workflow.

Author: Updated!

#### Bare Metal Pool Creation

1. The Bare Metal Pool CR is created, specifying the desired Host Set and Profile
2. The Bare Metal Pool Operator:
  * Iterates through `spec.hostSets` and creates a Host Lease CR for each requested host
    * Uses the following values when creating the Host Lease CRs
      * Adds the host set’s host type to the Host Lease CRs `spec.selector` dictionary
      * Adds the values in the profile’s `matchLabels` attribute to the Host Lease CRs `spec.selector` dictionary
      * Sets `spec.template`
        * The template ID is taken from the profile’s `hostTemplate` value
        * The template input is taken from `spec.profile.input`
    * Executes the provisioning step of the template specified by the profile’s `bareMetalPoolTemplate`

>       * This template might contain a step that waits for the pool’s hosts to be provisioned

Reviewer: The descriptive text shouldn't be an additional bullet point (because it's not a step in the workflow):

```suggestion
    * Executes the provisioning step of the template specified by the profile’s `bareMetalPoolTemplate`. This template might contain a step that waits for the pool’s hosts to be provisioned
```

But it also seems kind of random in its current location: everything else here is description of workflow step, and without any exposition around it it's not really clear why this point it interesting or relevant.

Author: I've removed this detail; thinking about it, it feels like something that maybe doesn't need to be called out.

3. The Host Inventory Operator:
  * Reconciles individual Host Lease CRs
    * Queries configured Bare Metal Inventory for a host that matches the Host Lease CR’s `spec.selector` dictionary and assigns it to the Bare Metal Pool
    * Updates the Host Lease CR with information returned from the above query, as well as the `hostClass` and `networkClass` specified by the operator’s inventory configuration
4. The Host Management Operator:
  * Executes the provisioning step of the template specified by the Host Lease CR’s `spec.template`

>     * This template will typically modify the Host Lease CR `spec` in order to perform operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Reconciles individual Host Lease CRs that match the operator's Host Class
  * Executes the provisioning step of the template specified by the Host Lease CR’s `spec.template`
    * This template will typically modify the Host Lease CR `spec` in order to perform operations
```

Reviewer: I am also a little unsure about:

```
This template will typically modify the Host Lease CR `spec` in order to
perform operations
```

I think the only attributes it will update are `spec.provisioning` and maybe `spec.online`. Maybe we should call that out explicitly?

```
This template will update the Host Lease CR's `spec.provisioning` field to
trigger provisioning tasks.
```

Author: I've added details about bare metal pool and host templates to the glossary under the `Proposals` section, and pushed this information up there.

    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available
  expectedParameters: [“imageURL”]
  bareMetalPoolTemplate: osac.templates.bm_private_network_create
  hostTemplate: osac.templates.bm_host_image_provision
```

* `matchLabels`: additional constraints to be used when selecting hosts for the Bare Metal Pool
* `bareMetalPoolTemplate`: similar to an OSAC cluster template; specifies an Ansible role with setup and tear down actions to be applied for the bare metal pool as a whole
* `hostTemplate`: similar to an OSAC cluster template; specifies an Ansible role with setup and tear down actions to be applied for an individual host
* `expectedParameter`: parameters expected by the above templates

Profiles are specified by the provider in a configuration file that can be read by the Bare Metal Pool Operator.

#### Host Lease

Host Lease CRs are created by the Bare Metal Pool Operator when it reconciles a Bare Metal Pool CR:

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: HostLease
metadata:
  name: host-54321
  namespace: osac-namespace
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:

>   selector:

Reviewer 3: Do we want the selector look like this?
```
spec:
  selector:
    hostSelector:
      hostType: fc430
      managedBy: None
    other_key: value
```
I think we've discussed that we might want to move `mangagedBy` and `hostType` to `hostSelector` and also optional key-value pairs for other slection purpose.

Author: Ah, that's right - fixed!

  templateParameters: some-json-string
  externalID: host-id
  externalName: host-name
  hostClass: openstack
  networkClass: openstack
  poweredOn: true
  networkInterfaces:
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f1
    network: private-vlan-network
  provisioning:
    url: http://iso.url
    state: active
status:
  poweredOn: false
  networkInterfaces:
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f1
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f2
  provisioning:
    state: available
```

The Host Management Operator will use APIs specific to its `hostClass` for provisioning and power operations. Note that a provisioning operation may require the backend bare metal management system to control the power state as well; as a result the operator may need to suspend power reconciliation during provisioning.

The operator will rely upon the OSAC Networking API to perform network attachment operations.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

Bare metal fulfillment is designed to support varying bare metal inventory and management backends. These
backends may often be one and the same - OpenStack Ironic, Carbide - but they may also be different - Netbox
for inventory, and OpenShift BareMetalHosts for management.

> We integrate with these backends in different ways. The Host Inventory Operator will accommodate multiple

Reviewer 4: @tzumainn can you please remind me why the host inventory will have a single operator for all the backends while the host management operator will be separate per each host class?

Author: Sure! This comes out of a discussion we had with Michael. The original suggestion was to have the bare metal pool operator perform the allocation by creating a host lease CR that already pointed at a host in the backend; and a host management operator manage the host.

Michael pointed out that this was not the normal k8s pattern, which would be to create a host lease object that has not yet been allocated a backend host, and then have an operator specific to host leases perform the allocation. After much discussion, we agreed to the current design mentioned in this document.

Reviewer 4: Thanks, that explains the separation between the BareMetalPool operator and the HostInventory one. But why having a separate HostManagement operator for each HostClass instead of having a single HostManagment operator to handle all the HostClasses like we do for NetworkClasses.

Author: To be honest, it was a suggestion that was made early on that no one really pushed back on. I think there were a couple of reasons:

* AAP did not seem like an efficient tool to use, especially in cases where Go libraries were available (such as gophercloud for OpenStack)
* untangling dependencies between unrelated bare metal management tools felt like it made sense, allowing each to release at their own cadence without potentially interfering with others
* having separate bare metal operators felt like the best path for a CSP with a unique bare metal management system that we did not necessarily want to integrate into OSAC

@larsks did I miss/mis-state anything here?

Reviewer: > having a single HostManagment operator to handle all the HostClasses like we do for NetworkClasses.

I'm not sure that was a great decision. If we look at the implementation of things like StorageClasses and IngressClasses, using a separate operator for each supported class is a very common model (because it allows implementing support for a backend by multiple unrelated organizations).

That was largely our motivation for our decisions around bare metal management: it follows established patterns in Kubernetes, and means that someone can implement support for a new backend without needing to touch any of our code or being constrained by any of our own implementation decisions.

Reviewer 5: I agree that theoretically it sounds very pluggable and extendable architecture. In reality, there are not so many partners that are ready to implement new operators, onboard them, certify, release, and that together with huge overhead of having more and more containers that monitor other containers, sounds like a very high barrier for entry in the current phase of the project.

Reviewer 6: >huge overhead of having more and more containers that monitor other containers, sounds like a very high barrier for entry in the current phase of the project.

This is my main concern right now.

We're looking at onboarding several new backends very quickly right now and I don't think it's worth taking on creating a new repo/container/deployment/ci for every one of them. I very much vote for consolidating the logic of the host management operator into the pluggable bits of the inventory implementation in the bare-metal-fullfilment-operator.

Author: I'll update this to squish these operators together!

Author: Overall proposal updated to specify a single host operator (in place of a host inventory operator + multiple host management operators)

* This proposal does not implement serial console access to bare metal hosts.
* This proposal does not accommodate a single OSAC environment with multiple bare metal inventories (although the architecture is designed to support this feature in the future).
* This proposal does not address reporting and billing requirements; those will be addressed in a future enhancement that exposes these resources in the fulfillment service.

## Proposal

### CRDs and Operators

We propose creating the following CRDs (full specifications can be found in the [API Extensions section](#API Extensions) below):

* **Host Lease:** Represents a lease on a host; an ephemeral resource that can be used to manipulate the host after acquisition, and which can be safely deleted when the host is released.

  * **Host Class:** Specifies how a host can be managed (OpenStack, Carbide, etc). Each Host is associated with one Host Class.
  * **Host Type:** Describes the type of hardware represented by this host. Analogous to "instance type" in AWS or "resource class" in Ironic. E.g. `fc430`, `h100`
  * **Host Template:** An Ansible role that details setup and teardown steps for an individual host.

> * **Bare Metal Pool:** Represents a collection of bare metal hosts that share a common desired configuration, and which cannot be used by others for the lifetime of the bare metal pool. It specifies two items:

Reviewer 6: >It specifies two items

There are three items in this list

Author: Whoops - fixed!

  * **Host Sets:** A collection of desired hosts
  * **Profile:** A configuration that specifies how the bare metal pool should behave. It specifies additional restrictions when selecting hosts, the template that should be applied to the bare metal pool, and the template that should be applied to each host. Profiles will initially be stored in a ConfigMap; a future enhancement may create Profile CRDs instead.

>   * **Bare Metal Pool Template:** An Ansible role that details setup and teardown steps for a bare metal pool as a whole.

Reviewer 6: Is the template on the pool or in the profile. I don't think it should be both.

Author: It's only in the profile - I'll add some indentation to make that clear.

* *AssignHost(ctx context.Context, inventoryHostID string, bareMetalPoolID string, bareMetalPoolHostID string, labels map[string]string)*: Assigns the host identified in the inventory as `inventoryHostID` to the bare metal pool and host lease specified by `bareMetalPoolID` and `bareMetalPoolHostID`, while also applying the additional labels specified by `labels`.
* *UnassignHost(ctx context.Context, inventoryHostID string, labels []string)*: Unassigns the host identified in the inventory as `inventoryHostID`, while also unsetting any labels listed in `labels`.

Note that an inventory implementation may break apart the match expressions in order to perform host selection in a way specific to that implementation; for example, the OpenStack implementation will compare a `hostType` match expression against an Ironic node's `resourceClass`, while comparing any other match expressions to values found in the `extra` attribute.

A bare metal inventory will be specified in OSAC as follows:

``` yaml
name: bare-metal-inventory
type: openstack                                  # corresponds to a bare metal inventory implementation
options: <access and credentials information>

> hostClass: openstack                             # applied to a Host Lease after a host is assigned

Reviewer 6: Is there a significant difference between type and host class? Would we really ever have multiple types for the same host class or the same host class in multiple types?

Author: I think so, yes; one example people used is if Netbox is used as the inventory, with $something_custom used to manage the hosts. In such a case, `type` would be `netbox` while `hostClass` would be `$something_custom`.

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: HostLease
metadata:
  name: host-54321
  namespace: osac-namespace
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    hostSelector:
      hostType: fc430
      managedBy: None
      provisionState: available
  templateID: osac.templates.bm_host-image-provision
  templateParameters: some-json-string
```

When a Host Lease CR is created, it is not initially associated with a host from the backend inventory. That association only occurs once the Host Operator performs reconciliation:

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: HostLease
metadata:
  name: host-54321
  namespace: osac-namespace
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    hostType: fc430
    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available
  templateID: osac.templates.bm_host-image-provision
  templateParameters: some-json-string
  externalID: host-id

>   externalName: host-name

Reviewer 6: Is there a compelling reason these shouldn't be status? Will we ever allow creating a lease by selecting a particular ID?

Author: We would not; this is something @mhrivnak requested, acknowledging it as counter-intuitive while giving us reasons why it's the correct k8s pattern. I, uh, may not be able to explain it as well.

Reviewer 7: Very short version: `status` cannot be the source of truth for anything. It is merely a record of what a controller observed in the world at some point in the past. You must be able to delete and re-create the status.

It's normal for controllers to add information to a spec as something comes to life. For example IP addresses on a Service that get assigned by the controller after the resource is created.

Reviewer 6: After the initial assignment though isn't the backend inventory the source of truth for this?

Assigning a host marks it in the inventory as matching with this lease. In that case this is more of an observation ("the backend says this lease is fulfilled by host id/name x") rather than "I'm going to ensure host id/name x is matched with this lease on the backend". So if the status were deleted with this information we could definitely recreate it from the information in the backend.

This did also make me think of another detail though. What about backup/restore. If we're using the object ID as an identifier in the backend, but a lease was recreated with a new id due to a restore, how would we handle that? Should we use something other than the kubernetes object id? Alternatively if the external info is in the spec then we could force reassignment to this lease's id at restore time. But that breaks the idea that the backend is the source of truth for this relationship info.

I think we should pick one of two options:

1. externalID/Name goes in status
    - Source of truth for relationship is in the backend metadata
    - Need a more durable identifier than kubernetes object id to support DR scenarios
2. externalID/Name goes in spec
    - Source of truth for relationship is object lease spec
    - DR scenario works OOTB

Does that make sense? I'm leaning toward 2 now, but I think that requires changes elsewhere or maybe they're just an implementation detail?

Author: Well, the current implementation already uses 2. I admit I'm not sure what DR means... ?

Reviewer 6: Disaster recovery - supporting backup/restore flows. In this case restoring host leases from a failed cluster is what I'm thinking of.

If we're shooting for 2 then this is fine with me.

  hostClass: openstack
  networkClass: openstack
status:
  poweredOn: false
```

> That assignment also sets the Host Lease CR's `hostClass` and `networkClass`. Once the `hostClass` is set, the Host Lease CR allows management operations against the assigned host (limited to power control for this proposal):

Reviewer 6: Why doesn't the pool set these on creation?

Author: That would require the bare metal pool to know about the underlying inventory. One thing we talked about with @mhrivnak is the idea that the host operator is the one that should handle host assignment; if that's the case, then I don't think that the bare metal pool operator should make any assumptions about the inventory, and we should leave it to the host operator to communicate with the inventory (and to set the `hostClass` and `networkClass` as a result)

Reviewer 6: Okay sorry I think I was mixing up inventory and profile.

Not for this enhancement, but what does this mean if there are multiple inventories? Could we have one pool that includes hosts from many? I thought a pool would likely only map to one.

Author: I think so too; to be honest we punted that question to the future. Up above, I specify that we currently assume that there's exactly one inventory specified.

## Summary

Bare metal fulfillment refers to the process through which bare metal hosts are acquired and configured. Requests for bare
metal fulfillment could be triggered by an OSAC tenant, or by a provider workflow, or by other OSAC fulfillment processes
(such as cluster fulfillment).

## Motivation

OSAC requires the manipulation of bare metal, whether for cluster fulfillment or agent provisioning or to satisfy tenant
requests. Bare metal fulfillment provides a unified API for this manipulation while also giving us a single point
of integration with backend bare metal inventory and management systems.

### User Stories

> * As an OSAC developer, I want a bare metal fulfillment architecture that allows support for multiple bare metal backends

Reviewer 8: let's stick to the persona we defined https://github.com/osac-project/docs/blob/main/personas.md

```suggestion
* As a Cloud Provider Admin, I want a bare metal fulfillment architecture that allows support for multiple bare metal backends
```

> * As an OSAC developer, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment in workflows such as cluster fulfillment

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* As a Cloud Provider Admin, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment in workflows such as cluster fulfillment
```

> * As a provider, I want to specify bare metal workflows for both internal and tenant use

Reviewer 8: isn't it cover by the previous statement? where CaaS will rely on BMaaS?

Author: True - I'll combine this with the previous statement!

Author: Updated!

> * As a provider, I want to track bare metal usage for reporting and billing purposes

Author: Removing this line, as this will be a non-goal for this enhancement proposal (as it will be covered by a later enhancement proposal that exposes these resources in the fulfillment service)

Author: Line removed

> * As a provider, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment in workflows such as agent provisioning

Reviewer 8: isn't it covered by "* As a Cloud Provider Admin, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment in workflows such as cluster fulfillment"

Author: I'll move this up as a subpoint regarding admin workflows, and clarify the purpose

Author: Combined above!

> * As a tenant, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment to acquire and configure hardware

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* As a tenant user, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment to acquire and configure hardware
```

> * As a tenant, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment to acquire and configure hardware

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* As a tenant user, I want to utilize bare metal fulfillment to acquire and configure hardware
```

### Goals

We will implement a bare metal fulfillment architecture that has the following features:

* Enables support for multiple bare metal backends
* Allows providers to specify bare metal workflows that automate bare metal configuration (such as image provisioning)
* Usable by tenants, providers, and within other OSAC fulfillment workflows (such as cluster fulfillment)

> * Tracks host assignment for reporting and billing purposes

Reviewer 8: billing is not covered in the rest of the document, should it be a goal? Also, we need to understand how it fit in the metering story of OSAC

Reviewer 6: I think the reporting and billing use case is important to mention even just to say that we need to keep the pools and leases around for the entire time a user has reserved the host.

@tzumainn I'm not sure how this matches up with the demo you did where the pool is ephemeral. How would an admin track hosts for reporting in that case? If reporting/billing is a feature of OSAC I wouldn't expect it to have to talk to all the different backends we support.

Reviewer 6: Maybe billing should integrate with the higher level OSAC API in https://github.com/osac-project/enhancement-proposals/pull/45?

Author: I'll clarify that this sort of reporting will happen in the fulfillment service, and is a non-goal of this particular proposal.

Author: Moved reporting/billing to non-goals!

### Non-Goals

* This proposal does not implement bare metal networking; instead, it assumes the existence of an OSAC Networking API that can be utilized when configuring networking for bare metal hosts.
* This proposal does not implement serial console access to bare metal hosts.
* This proposal does not accommodate a single OSAC environment with multiple bare metal inventories (although the architecture is designed to support this feature in the future).

## Proposal

> We propose creating the following CRDs:

Reviewer 6: Maybe defining all the fields (or as many as we currently know) here would be helpful.

Author: Yep - I'll update this!

Author: I've actually just provided a link to the API Extensions section, which does include full examples; let me know if you think that's sufficient!

> * **Bare Metal Pool:** A bare metal pool represents a collection of bare metal hosts which share a common desired configuration. It specifies two items:

Reviewer 8: I think it's just presentation, but I would prefer to have the description about a single host, and then the explanation about the pools, and I guess we need the concept of pool to match the nodepool for CaaS? I think it should be said. (it makes me think of autoscaler groups in AWS, which is a higher level concept, and could be generalized with VMaaS in the future, I even remember EKS use ASG to manage the workers)

Reviewer 8: Just to formalize my mind here, I feel the BareMetalPool mixes 2 concepts (I may biased to AWS for the naming):
- Pool, which represent a set of finite resources that a user can lease from the pool and release to the pool (like IPPools)
- Group, which is a way to represent a set of (leased) resources, and can be referenced as a whole (worker group for CaaS or as backend for a LoadBalancer), we can automate scale-up and scale-down inside that group if the resources share the same configuration

Reviewer 6: I wonder if we're actually trying to address the first use case.

As far as I can tell currently there is the concept of the "idle agent pool", but a BareMetalPool doesn't actually exist for those. Based on the recent demo the pool itself only exists to create the `Agent` CRs and then later when a cluster is actually provisioned. In this case the pool only exists to define the network the host should belong to in the management system.

If we want a pool to actually model the first use case then it would need to exist throughout the entire lifecycle of the host and we'd need to change or create the network as a separate part of cluster automation.

~~That said, we also need to consider the billing implications of this. If a user wants to reserve a host for possible autoscaling (for example) they should likely be billed for that host if no one else can reserve it. This is different from us reserving a list of agents on the backend to make cluster provisioning faster. I'm still trying to figure out which of these is actually a requirement right now and which the current demo was trying to implement. My guess is that it was just for speed rather than mapping to a specific tenant for autoscaling availability because if a tenant wants to take advantage of autoscaling using hypershift then the unbound agents would need to already be associated to them rather than being in a platform-level pool.~~

EDIT: Got confirmation that the admin owns agents that are preprovisioned so billing isn't a concern here.

My idea would be to not actually model a real "Pool" of hosts and instead leave that to the backend to recognize what hosts are available to be provisioned based on the information the infra admin provided. Maybe we need to create a CR for the infra credentials that could include things like limiting us to particular tags, namespaces, instance types, etc. Then that would effectively define our "pool". This then leaves the `BareMetalPool` resource to just be a placeholder for "automation we want to run that applies to a group of hosts when we want to provision them".

I know this is a whole lot of information though so maybe the takeaway is that the usecases need to be more clear. Bare metal fulfillment is a subsystem that we intend many other services to use so our use cases should come from them. I could image some like:

- As CaaS I want to provision hosts for a user that are reserved for autoscaling existing clusters.
- As Billing I want to easily identify which hosts are reserved for a particular user.

Author: I'll add some clarification regarding how this is different from a more typical "Pool" (which has a group of resources that can be checked out and returned).

Author: Updated!

>   * **Host Sets:** A collection of desired hosts

Reviewer 6: If a pool can contain multiple sets, when would someone create a new set vs a new pool?

>   * **Profile:** A configuration that specifies how the bare metal pool should behave. It specifies additional restrictions when selecting hosts, the template that should be applied to the bare metal pool, and the template that should be applied to each host.

Reviewer 6: This feels like a lot for one field. Does this really do all of:
- host restrictions
- pool template (feels like the field below is exactly this?)
- host template (isn't this on the lease?)

Author: This could be a CR in the future; I'll mention that as a potential enhancement

Author: Updated the text!

>   * **Bare Metal Pool Template:** An Ansible role that details setup and teardown steps for a bare metal pool as a whole. Can be written so

Reviewer 6: Looks like this sentence needs to be finished?

Author: I'll finish this sentence and indent properly so it's clear that it's part of the profile!

Author: Removed the leftover words. The indentation looks correct to me once the Markdown is resolved; I think it's only mis-indented in the github diff.

* **Host Lease:** Represents a lease on a host; an ephemeral resource that can be used to manipulate the host after acquisition, and which can be safely deleted when the host is released.
  * **Host Class:** Specifies how a host can be managed (OpenStack, Carbide, etc). Each Host is associated with one Host Class.

>   * **Host Type:** Describes the type of hardware represented by this host. Analogous to "instance type" in AWS or "resource class" in Ironic. E.g. `fc430`, `h100`

Author: This should be mentioned when describing the inventory contract

Author: Added a `Bare Metal Inventory` subsection within the `Proposal` section that mentions the host type requirement

>   * **Host Template:** An Ansible role that details setup and teardown steps for an individual host. These steps will typically modify a HostLease's `spec` to manage provisioning, power state, and/or network attachment.

Author: I'll take out the second sentence.

Author: Removed!

These CRDs will be managed by the following operators:

* **Bare Metal Pool Operator:**

  * Creates/deletes Host Lease CRs corresponding to the hosts desired for the bare metal pool
  * Executes setup/teardown templates applicable to the entire bare metal pool (and not to individual hosts)

> * **Host Inventory Operator:** Reconciles Host Leases with no Host Class assigned. Queries the backend inventory, assigns a host, and populates the Host Lease CR with information about that host (including the Host Class).

Reviewer 8: if there are no host class (which gives the information about the provisionner, e.g.: OpenStack), how the operator knows which inventory back-end to use? Or we take the assumption that their will be 1 inventory that will handle hosts across several host classes?

Is this inventory operator plug-able?

Author: We are currently assuming a single bare metal inventory; I can call that out better.

Author: Added this requirement in the new `Bare Metal Inventory` subsection within the `Proposal` section

> * **Host Management Operator (Host Class-specific):** Reconciles Host Leases corresponding to the operator's Host Class; a new Host Management Operator will be created for each bare metal management backend. Allows bare metal management operations to be performed upon the host associated with the Host Lease (power management, provisioning, etc).

Reviewer 6: What determines what this operator handles vs what should be done in an ansible role?

Author: I'll make a clearer distinction; sounds like you believe that provisioning may be more complicated and should be part of an ansible role instead (which I do not disagree with), so I'll clarify the contract.

Author: Added a clarification here!

    * Queries configured Bare Metal Inventory for a host that matches the Host Lease CR’s `spec.selector` dictionary and assigns it to the Bare Metal Pool
    * Updates the Host Lease CR with information returned from the above query, as well as the `hostClass` and `networkClass` specified by the operator’s inventory configuration
4. The Host Management Operator:
  * Executes the provisioning step of the template specified by the Host Lease CR’s `spec.template`

#### Bare Metal Pool Scale Up

1. The Bare Metal Pool CR is modified to add an additional host in the specified Host Set
2. The Bare Metal Pool Operator:
  * Counts the pool’s existing Host Lease CRs against requested hosts, and creates Host Lease CRs as required
    * Uses the following values when creating the Host Lease CRs
      * Adds the host set’s host type to the Host Lease CRs `spec.selector` dictionary
      * Adds the values in the profile’s `matchLabels` attribute to the Host Lease CRs `spec.selector` dictionary
      * Sets `spec.template`
        * The template ID is taken from the profile’s `hostTemplate` value
        * The template input is taken from `spec.profile.input`

>     * Executes the provisioning step of the template specified by the profile’s `bareMetalPoolTemplate`

Reviewer 6: This seems a bit odd. Why do this again if this is pool specific logic? Shouldn't the lease template handle adding a single host?

Author: You're right - I'll remove this

Author: Removed!

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: BareMetalPool
metadata:
  name: bm-pool-12345
  namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  hostSets:
    - hostType: fc430
      replicas: 2
    - hostType: h100
      replicas: 1
  profile:
    name: imageProvisioning
    templateParameters: some-json-string
```

The profile allows for the automated configuration of a Bare Metal Pool. For example, an `imageProvisioning` profile might look like the following:

``` yaml
imageProvisioning:
  matchLabels:
    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available
  expectedParameters: [“imageURL”]
  bareMetalPoolTemplate: osac.templates.bm_private_network_create
  hostTemplate: osac.templates.bm_host_image_provision
```

* `matchLabels`: additional constraints to be used when selecting hosts for the Bare Metal Pool
* `bareMetalPoolTemplate`: similar to an OSAC cluster template; specifies an Ansible role with setup and tear down actions to be applied for the bare metal pool as a whole
* `hostTemplate`: similar to an OSAC cluster template; specifies an Ansible role with setup and tear down actions to be applied for an individual host
* `expectedParameter`: parameters expected by the above templates

> Profiles are specified by the provider in a configuration file that can be read by the Bare Metal Pool Operator.

Reviewer 6: What file? Where exactly does the operator read this from?

Author: Up above I'll specify it is currently a config map but could be expanded into a CR later

Author: Clarified above!

    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    hostSelector:
      hostType: fc430
      managedBy: None
      provisionState: available
  templateID: osac.templates.bm_host-image-provision
  templateParameters: some-json-string
```

When a Host Lease CR is created, it is not associated with a host from the backend inventory. That
association only occurs after the Host Inventory Operator reconciles the Host Lease CR:

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: HostLease
metadata:
  name: host-54321
  namespace: osac-namespace
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    hostType: fc430
    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available
  templateID: osac.templates.bm_host-image-provision
  templateParameters: some-json-string
  externalID: host-id
  externalName: host-name
  hostClass: openstack
  networkClass: openstack
status:
  poweredOn: false
  networkInterfaces:
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f1
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f2
  provisioning:
    state: available
```

> That assignment also sets the Host Lease CR's `hostClass` and `networkClass`. Once the `hostClass` is set,

Reviewer 6: I feel like I remember talking about this, but why not have separate CRDs for this with one for each class? I feel like there's a chance that this one gets bloated or ends up with some open ended configuration without a schema once we have to handle the details of additional backends.

Doing it with separate resources would also separate the concerns in a better way. With just the one HostLease you have multiple controllers setting spec and unclear ownership (which controller will finalize the resource, and in what order, for example).

``` yaml
apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: HostLease
metadata:
  name: host-54321
  namespace: osac-namespace
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: osac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: BareMetalPool
    name: bm-pool-12345
    namespace: osac-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    hostType: fc430
    managedBy: None
    provisionState: available
  templateID: osac.templates.bm_host-image-provision
  templateParameters: some-json-string
  externalID: host-id
  externalName: host-name
  hostClass: openstack
  networkClass: openstack
  poweredOn: true
  networkInterfaces:
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f1
    network: private-vlan-network
  provisioning:
    url: http://iso.url
    state: active
status:
  poweredOn: false
  networkInterfaces:
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f1
  - macAddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:f2
  provisioning:
    state: available
```

The Host Management Operator will use APIs specific to its `hostClass` for provisioning and power operations. Note that a provisioning operation may require the backend bare metal management system to control the power state as well; as a result the operator may need to suspend power reconciliation during provisioning.

> The operator will rely upon the OSAC Networking API to perform network attachment operations.

Reviewer 6: Here we say we're using the Networking API, but earlier we say the playbook handles network attachment. This should be consistent across the doc, and ideally we should have more information about what using the Networking API mean here. I wonder if we even really need a `networkClass` in this case?

> **Host Template:** An Ansible role that details setup and teardown steps for an individual host. These steps will typically modify a HostLease's `spec` to manage provisioning, power state, and/or network attachment.

ref: https://github.com/osac-project/enhancement-proposals/pull/31/changes#diff-70157f34fc2126a2078e273ab1f5edbd84e1c5d760a21f9cca50cc40ead8dfd8R67

Author: I'll clarify that integration with the networking API is a non-goal, and update these template examples to be more open-ended in regards to their implementation

Author: Removed this line in favor of a limited Host Lease CR. Clarified the expected usage of `networkClass`.

We integrate with these backends in different ways. The Host Inventory Operator will accommodate multiple
bare metal inventory backends; this integration is coded directly in the operator. On the other hand, the
Host Management Operator will be specific to a particular host class; thus, there will be separate
Host Management Operators for Ironic, Carbide, etc.

We assume that the external inventory should always contain an accurate representation of the current state
of any bare metal host. As a result, we do not have an intermediate host representation within OSAC, as that
merely adds an additional sync requirement.

### Risks and Mitigations

We need to integrate with a variety of bare metal backends. If our design does not allow us to do so
easily, then we may find ourselves in a position where we need to restructure and recode a significant
chunk of our architecture. In order to mitigate this risk, we will clearly identify the process for integrating
with a backend; and we will isolate the integration points to both minimize the needed integration work, and
to reduce the impact of portions of this architecture need to be reworked.

### Drawbacks

TBD

> ## Alternatives (Not Implemented)

Reviewer 8: I think we should explain why ansible was not chosen as we did in other part of OSAC which creates another way of customizing workflows for service providers.

Author: Addressed above!

One question that has been raised is whether it's possible to standardize on a single bare metal management
backend, with OpenShift BareMetalHosts identified as an ideal backend. However, BareMetalHosts do not currently

> meet all of the MOC's requirements (such as networking or integration with an external inventory).

Reviewer 6: What are the networking requirements? OCP has a BMaaS feature in tech preview and I wonder if this helps in any way.

ref: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.21/html/installing_on_bare_metal/bare-metal-using-bare-metal-as-a-service
